https://postmarkapp.com/blog/explaining-spf#how-spf-works

How SPF protects you #
The SMTP protocol, the literal definition of email, has no protections on the From field in an email. As long as it’s a valid email address, there is no further validation.
A malevolent actor can impersonate your bank, your employer or anyone at all. This problem led to the creation of SPF.

SPF is a relatively recent solution. Different variations of the idea were proposed in the early 2000s and these coalesced into the SPF specification as RFC 4408 in April 2006.
SPF describes a DNS record in a special format to list all the domains allowed to send mail from the domain.
This allows spam filters to easily check if the origin of an email is from an authorized domain.

How SPF works #
At a high level, here is the workflow of how a mail server checks SPF:

the Postmark server with IP address of 1.2.3.4 sends a message FROM joe@foo.com TO jill@bar.com
the bar.com mail server gets the DNS records of type TXT for foo.com, looking for the SPF record
the bar.com mail server compares the 1.2.3.4 IP address against the parts of the foo.com SPF record (described below)
the message is accepted or rejected based on which part of the SPF record it matches

Let’s go over what qualifiers are available.

+ Pass, an IP that matches a mechanism with this qualifier will pass SPF.
- Fail, an IP that matches a mechanism with this qualifier will fail SPF.
~ SoftFail, an IP that matches a mechanism with this qualifier will soft fail SPF, which means that the host should accept the mail, but mark it as an SPF failure.
? Neutral, an IP that matches a mechanism with this qualifier will neither pass or fail SPF.

https://blog.returnpath.com/how-to-explain-spf-in-plain-english/

Two “From” Addresses

Email messages contain two “from” addresses: the “envelope from” (e.g., return path or mfrom) and the “header from” (e.g., the friendly from).

The “envelope from” is the return address—it tells mail servers where to return, or bounce, the message back to.
It’s contained in the hidden email message header, which includes technical details servers use to to understand who the message is for, what software was used to compose it, etc.

SPF is an email authentication protocol that allows the owner of a domain to specify which mail servers they use to send mail from that domain.

Brands sending email publish SPF records in the Domain Name System (DNS). These records list which IP addresses are authorized to send email on behalf of their domains.

During an SPF check, email providers verify the SPF record by looking up the domain name listed in the “envelope from” address in the DNS.
If the IP address sending email on behalf of the “envelope from” domain isn’t listed in that SPF record, the message fails SPF authentication.

